The sky was yellow as brass, not yet hidden by the smoke
from the chimney stacks. Behind the roofs of the factory the
radiance was especially bright. The sun must be just rising. I
looked at my watch; not eight o'clock. A quarter of an hour
too early.
Still I opened the gate, and put the petrol pump in readiness. There was always a car or two passing at that hour wanting a fill.
Suddenly I heard behind me a harsh, high-pitched
squeaking—like the sound of a rusty hoist being turned somewhere down under the earth. I stood still and listened. I
walked back across the yard to the workshop and cautiously
opened the door.
A ghost—stumbling about in the gloom! It had a dirty
white cloth wound about its head, its skirt was hitched up to
give its knees clearance; it had a blue apron, a pair of thick
slippers, and was wielding a broom; it weighed around fourteen stone, and was in fact our charwoman, Matilda Stoss.
I stood watching her. With all the grace of a hippopotamus, she made her way staggering among the radiators,
singing in a hollow voice as she went "the Song of the Bold
Hussar." On the bench by the window stood two cognac
bottles, one of them almost empty. Last night they had been
full. I had forgotten to lock them away.
"But Frau Stoss!" I protested.
The singing stopped; the broom dropped to the floor. The
beatific smile died away. Now it was my turn to be the ghost.
"Holy Jesus!" exclaimed Matilda, staring at me with
bleary eyes. "I wasn't expecting you yet."
"That doesn't surprise me. Did it taste good?"
"Sure and it did. But this is so awkward, Herr Lohkamp."
She wiped her hand across her mouth. "I just can't
understand—"
"Come, Matilda, that's an exaggeration. You're only tight
—full as a tick, eh?"
She maintained her balance with difficulty and
stood there blinking like an old owl. Gradually her mind became clear. Resolutely she took a step forward.
"Man is human, Herr Lohkamp, after all. . . I only
smelled it at first . . . and then I took just one little nip, because well, you know, I always have had a weak stomach . . .
and then . . . then I think the Devil must have got hold of me.
Anyway, you have no right to lead an old woman into temptation, leaving good bottles standing about like that. . . ."
It was not the first time I had caught her so. She used to
come to us for two hours every morning to clean up the workshop; and though one might leave as much money lying
around as one liked she would never disturb it—but schnapps
she could smell out as far off as a rat a slice of bacon.
I held up the bottles. "Naturally! You've left the customers' cognac. . . . But the good stuff, Herr Köster's own—you've
polished it all off."
A grin appeared on her weather-beaten face. "Trust me,
Herr Lohkamp; I'm a connoisseur! But you won't tell, Herr
Lohkamp—and me a poor widow?"
She unpinned her skirt. "Then I'd better be going. If Herr
Köster should catch me . . ." She threw up her hands.
I went to the cupboard and opened it. "Matilda. . . ."
She came waddling along. I held up a rectangular brown
bottle.
Protesting, she held up her hands.
"It wasn't me," she said. "Honour bright, it wasn't, Herr
Lohkamp. I didn't even smell it!"
"You don't even know what it is, I suppose?" said I, filling
a glass.
"No?" she replied, licking her lips. "Rum. Stone Age
Jamaica."
"Excellent! Then how about a glass?"
"Me?" She started back. "This is too much, Herr Lohkamp! This is heaping coals of fire on my head. Here's old
Stoss goes and mops up all your cognac on the quiet and then
you treat her to a rum on top of it! You're a saint, Herr Lohkamp, that's what you are! I'll see myself in my grave before
I touch a drop of it."
"You're quite sure, Matilda?" said I, making to drink it
myself.
"Well, all right, then," said she swiftly, seizing the glass.
"One must take the good as it comes. Even though one
doesn't understand. Good health! It's not your birthday, I
suppose?"
"More or less, Matilda. A good guess."
"No, not really?" She seized my hand. "Many happy returns! And lots of dough, Herr Lohkamp. . . . Why, I'm all of a
quiver. . . . I must have another to celebrate that. I'm as fond
of you as if you were my own son!"
"Very good."
I poured her another glass. She tipped it down, and, still
singing my praises, she left the workshop.
I put the bottle away and sat down at the table. The pallid
sunlight through the window shone upon my hands. A queer
feeling, a birthday—even though it means nothing. Thirty
years. . . . I remember the time when I thought I should never
reach twenty—it seemed so far away. And then. . . .
I took a sheet of paper from the drawer and began to
reckon. Childhood, school—an unresolvable complex of things
and happenings—so remote, another world, not real any
more. Real life began only in 1916. I had just joined the
Army—eighteen years of age, thin and lanky. And a snotty
sergeant-major who used to make me practise, on-the-handsdown, over and over again in the mud of the ploughed fields
at the back of the barracks . . . One evening my mother came
to the barracks to visit me; but she had to wait for me over an
hour, because I had failed to pack my kit the regulation way,
and as punishment had been ordered to scrub out the latrines.
She offered to help me, but that was not allowed. She cried,
and I was so tired that I fell asleep as I sat there beside her.
1917. Flanders. Mittendorf and I bought a bottle of red
wine at the canteen. . . . We intended to celebrate. But we never got so far, for early that morning the English bombardment
began. Köster was wounded about midday; Meyer and Deters
were killed during the afternoon. Then, with nightfall, just as
we thought things were quietening down, and were about to
draw the cork, gas came over and filled the dugouts. We had
our masks on in good time, but Mittendorf's was defective,
and by the time he knew it, it was too late. He ripped it off,
but before a new one could be found he had swallowed so
much gas he was spewing blood. He died the next morning,
green and black in the face.
1918. That was in hospital. A fresh convoy had come in a
few days before. Paper bandages. Badly wounded cases.
Groans. Low operating-trolleys trundling back and forth all
day. Josef Stoll was in the bed next to mine. Both his legs
were off, but he didn't know that. He could not see it, because
the bedclothes were supported on a wire cradle. He would not
have believed it anyway, for he could still feel the pain in his
feet. Two chaps died in the night in our room, one very slowly
and hard.
1919. Home again. Revolution. Starvation. And outside
the machine-guns rattling. Soldier against soldier.
1920. Putsch. Karl Bröger shot. Köster and Lenz arrested.
My mother in hospital. Cancer.
1921. . . .
I pondered awhile. No, I couldn't remember. That year,
was missing. 1922, I was a platelayer in Thuringia; 1923, advertising manager for a rubber goods firm. That was during
the inflation. At one time I was earning as much as two hundred billion marks a month. We used to be paid twice a day,
each payment followed by a half-hour's leave, so that one
could dash out to the shops and buy something before next
publication of the dollar exchange rate—for by that time the
money would be again worth only half.
And then what? The years after that? I put down the pencil. There was no point in going over all that. Anyway, I could
not remember any longer; it had been all too confused. My
last birthday I celebrated as pianist at the Café International.
It was then I met Köster and Lenz once more. And now here I
was in the Aurewo—Auto-Repair-Workshop; Köster & Co.
Lenz and I were the "Co.," but the shop belonged really only
to Köster. He had been our school friend, and in the Army pur
company commander; then he became an air pilot, and later
for a time a student; then a speedway racer. . . . And finally he
had bought this show. Lenz, after spending some years drifting around South America, had been first to join him—then I.
I fished a cigarette from my pocket. After all, I had every
reason to be content. I was not so badly off really; I had work,
I was strong, I did not tire easily, I was healthy as things go. . .
. But it was better not to think too much about all that—when
alone, at any rate; and especially at night. For every now and
then things had a way of rising up suddenly out of the past
and staring at one with dead eyes. It was against such times
that one kept a bottle of schnapps.
The gate creaked on its hinges. I tore up the slip of paper
with the dates on it and threw it into the wastepaper basket.
The door burst open, and Gottfried Lenz—tall, thin, with a
straw-coloured mop of hair and a nose that might have belonged to somebody else—stood framed in the doorway.
"Bobby," he bawled, "you lump of obesity, stand up! Put
your heels together! Your superior officers wish to speak to
you!
"Herrgott!" I stood up. "I hoped you wouldn't remember.
. . . Don't make a song about it."
"You're not the only one to be considered," said Gottfried,
putting down on the table a parcel in which was something
that clinked and rattled. Köster came in after him.
Lenz stood towering over me. "What was the first thing
you met this morning, Bob?"
I thought awhile. "An old woman dancing."
"Holy Moses! There's an omen, if you like! Fits in with
your horoscope exactly! I had it cast yesterday. You are born
under Sagittarius—weak, unreliable, a reed in the wind—with
Saturn sitting in an ugly quarter and Jupiter unfavourable
this year. Köster and I are in loco parentis, you understand,
therefore I ask you to accept, for your very necessary protection, first this amulet. I had it from a direct descendant of the
last of the Incas. She had blue blood and flat feet; she was
lousy, and had the gift of clairvoyance. 'Pale-faced stranger,'
she said to me, 'kings have worn this; the power of sun, moon
and earth are in it, to say nothing of the lesser planets. . . .
Give me a silver dollar for it to buy schnapps and it is yours.'
That the chain of fortune may not be broken, I now give it to
you. May it preserve you and put to flight unfriendly Jupiter."
He hung about my neck a little black figure suspended on a
thin chain. "There. That is against major misfortunes. . . .
Against those of every day, there is this—six bottles of rum.
From Otto. Every drop twice as old as you are."
He opened the parcel and stood the bottles up one by one
in the morning sunshine. They glowed like amber. "Looks
marvellous," said I. "Where did you get it, Otto?"
Köster smiled. "That's a long story. But say, Boy, how do
you feel? Thirty?"
I shook my head. "Like sixteen and fifty both at the same
time. Pretty punk, in other words. . . ."
"Pretty punk! What do you mean?" objected Lenz. "Why,
that's the most wonderful thing in the world. It means you've
conquered time and are living twice over!"
Köster looked at me. "Let him alone, Gottfried," said he
then. "Birthdays weigh heavily on one's self-esteem. Early in
the morning especially. He'll pick up later."
Lenz knit his brows. "The less a man thinks of himself the
better he is. Doesn't that comfort you now, Bob?"
"Not at all," said I. "The better a man is the more he has
to live up to. I find that rather strenuous and a bore anyway."
"Wonderful! He's philosophizing, Otto! He's saved
already," said Lenz. "The worst is over—the crisis is over—
he's past the birthday hour when a man looks himself in the
eye and finds that after all he is only a poor mutt. . . Now for
the daily round with a quiet mind, and to the old Cadillac to
oil his innards."
We worked till dusk, then washed and dressed.
Lenz eyed the row of bottles covetously. "What do you say
to cracking one, Otto?"
"That's for Bob, not for me, to say," said Köster. "You
know, Gottfried, it's not polite to make a gift and then throw
off hints like a howitzer."
"Still less is it polite to let a benefactor die of thirst,"
retorted Lenz, drawing a cork.
The smell filled the whole place.
"Holy Mother!" exclaimed Gottfried.
We all sniffed.
"Fantastic, Otto! Outside the poets, there are not words
to describe it."
"It's too good for this murky hole," said Lenz. "I've an
idea. . . . Let's go and have supper in the country somewhere
and take the bottles with us. We can finish them off in God's
great out-of-doors."
"Excellent!"
We shoved aside the Cadillac on which we had been
working all afternoon, and disclosed behind it a queer-look
ing object on four wheels: Otto Köster's racing car—the pride
of the workshop.
Köster had bought the car, a top-heavy old bus, at an auction for next to nothing. Connoisseurs who saw it at the time
pronounced it without hesitation an interesting specimen for
a transport museum. Bollwies, wholesale manufacturer of
ladies' ready-made dresses and incidentally a speedway enthusiast, advised Otto to convert it into a sewing machine. But
Köster was not to be discouraged. He took down the car as if it
had been a watch, and worked on it night after night for
months. Then one evening he turned up in it outside the bar
which we usually frequented. Bollwies nearly fell over with
laughing when he saw it, it still looked so funny. For a bit of
fun he challenged Otto to a race. He offered two hundred
marks to twenty if Köster would take him on in his new sports
car—course ten kilometres, Otto to have a kilometre start.
Otto took up the bet. But Otto went one better. He refused the
handicap and raised the odds to even money, a thousand
marks each way. Bollwies, delighted, offered to drive him to a
mental home immediately. Everyone laughed and prepared to
enjoy the joke. Köster's only response was to switch on his engine. They set off to settle the matter at once. Bollwies came
back looking as if he had seen the great sea serpent, and wrote
out the cheque and another as well. He wanted to buy the machine on the spot. But Köster just laughed at him. He wouldn't
have parted with it for any money on earth. Outside it looked
a terrible wreck, but inside it was like a new pin. For daily use
we had rigged it with a particularly old-fashioned body that
had just happened to fit; the paint was gone, the mudguards
were split, and the hood was quite ten years old! We could
have done it better, of course. But we had a reason for not doing so.
"Karl," we christened him—Karl, the Road Spook.
Karl was sniffing along the highway.
"Otto," said I, "here comes a victim."
A big Buick hooted impatiently behind us. He was overtaking us rapidly. Soon the two radiators were level. The man
at the wheel glanced at us idly! His eye surveyed the shabby
Karl contemptuously. Then he looked away—and had forgotten us already.
A few seconds later he was obliged to notice that Karl was
still running him neck-and-neck. He sat up a little, gave us an
amused glance, and stepped on the accelerator. Still Karl did
not yield. Little and fleet as a terrier running beside a bloodhound, he still held his place alongside the gleaming locomotive of nickel and varnish.
The man gripped the wheel more firmly. He was still
completely unsuspecting, and gave us a scornful look. He had
decided, evidently, to show us what his sleigh could do. He
stepped so hard on the accelerator that the exhaust roared
again. But it was no good. He could not get by. Unsightly and
ill-favoured, Karl stuck to him still.
The man stared down at us in astonishment. He could
not believe his eyes—at a speed of over sixty miles an hour not
to have shaken off this antiquated rattletrap! He glanced at
his speedometer in bewilderment—there must be something
wrong with the thing. He opened her out.
The two cars were now racing side by side along the
straight road. After a few hundred yards a lorry came clattering up from the opposite direction. The Buick had to drop
back behind us to let it pass. No sooner was he" alongside
again than a motor-hearse swept into view, wreath-ribbons
trailing in the wind; once again he had to give way. Thereafter
the course lay open.
In the meantime the man at the wheel had lost his arrogance; annoyed, lips compressed, he sat there leaning forward—the racing fever had got him and now his whole life depended on not being outdone by our little mongrel.
We, on the other hand, sat apparently unmoved in our
seats. For us the Buick simply did not exist. Köster kept his
eyes calmly fixed on the road; Lenz, though a bundle of excitement, took out a newspaper as if be had nothing better to do
than just read.
A few minutes later Köster gave us a wink. Imperceptibly
Karl slackened speed and the Buick came slowly up. Its broad
gleaming mudguards urged past us. The exhaust sent a blast
of blue smoke into our faces. Little by little he gained on
us—twenty yards—then, as we had expected, red and perspiring but happy, the face of the owner showed in the window
and grinned open triumph. He thought he had won.
But he could not leave it at that; he could not forgo his revenge. He waved us on—waved nonchalantly, like a victor.
"Otto," said Lenz warningly.
But he had no need to speak; at that moment Karl made
one bound. The compressor shrieked. And suddenly the waving hand at the window disappeared—for Karl had accepted
the invitation; he came. He came steadily, until at last we had
recovered the lost ground; then for the first time we took
notice of the stranger. In innocent inquiry we looked to the
man at the wheel, as if to ask why he had signalled. But he
kept his eyes rigidly turned away; and Karl, the triumphant
guttersnipe, stiff with dirt, flapping mudguards, drew away at
top speed.
"Well done, Otto," said Lenz to Köster. "There's one man
won't enjoy his supper this evening."
The chases were the reason we did not change Karl's
body. He had only to show himself on the road for someone to
want to take a rise out of him. To other cars he was as a lame
crow to a pack of hungry cats. Even the most peace-loving
family coach felt incited to pass him; at the sight of such an
old rattletrap dancing now before, now behind them, even the
most staid of middle-aged beavers would be seized with
racing-fever. For who was to know that within that ridiculous
body pulsed the great heart of a racer?
Lenz maintained that Karl had an educative effect; he
taught folk a proper respect for creative talent, that always
lurks under ap unprepossessing exterior. At least, so said
Lenz—who also said of himself that he was the last of the
romantics.
We pulled up in front of a little inn and got out of the car.
The evening was beautiful and calm. The troughs of the furrows in the new-ploughed fields glowed purple; the ridges
were brown and burning gold. Great clouds, like flamingoes,
floated in the apple-green sky, and slender in the midst of
them lay the sickle of the waxing moon. Distressfully bare
still, yet full of the promise of bud, a hazel bough held the
evening and dream in its arms. From the inn issued a smell of
frying liver. Onions, too. Our hearts swelled.
I didn't care about the two groschen. Only I wasn't in a
mood to let him do the dirty on me. "Cut the cackle and pass
up the rest," said I.
The porter hit so suddenly that I could not cover myself;
nor, on my box, could I dodge it. My head struck the steering
wheel. Dazed, I picked myself up. The porter was standing in
front of me: "Want another, you big stiff?"
In a second I calculated my chances. There was nothing
for it. The fellow was stronger than I. My only hope would
have been to take him by surprise. I could not punch from the
box, it would have no power. And by the time I got out' of the
car he could down me half a dozen times. I looked at him. He
blew his beery breath in my face: "One word more and your
wife's a widow."
I looked at him. I did not move, I stared into that big
healthy face. I devoured it with my eyes. I saw exactly where I
must hit; I was ice-cold with rage. But I did not stir. I saw the
face, too close, too distinct, as through a magnifying glass, immense, every bristle, the red, coarse, porous skin . . .
A policeman's helmet gleamed. "What's up here?"
The porter put on a servile look. "Nothing, Herr
Constable."
He looked at me. "Nothing," said I.
He looked from the porter back to me. "You're bleeding?"
"Knocked myself."
The porter stepped back a pace. There was a grin in his
eye. He thought I was afraid to accuse him.
"Right, off you go then," said the policeman.
I stepped on the accelerator and drove back to the stand.
The fat chap looked at us rather disconcerted. He became
unsure of himself and evidently did not know, any more, what
to make of the business.
"Binding," said he at last with a slight bow, as if this
name at least were something he could be sure of.
The girl had now come up. We became still more friendly.
"Show them the car, Otto," said Lenz, with a swift glance
at Köster.
"Why not?" replied Otto, returning his glance with an
amused twinkle.
"I should like very much to see it," said Binding, already
more conciliatory. "Must be damned fast. Just wiped me right
off the map."
The two went across to the parking place and Köster lifted up Karl's bonnet.
The girl did not go. Slim and silent she stood beside Lenz
and me in the twilight. I expected Gottfried to profit by the
opportunity and get busy like a bomb. He was made for such
situations. But he seemed to have lost the faculty of speech.
Ordinarily he could woo like a turkey cock—but now he just
stood like a Carmelite monk on leave and did not stir.
"You must forgive us," said I at last. "We did not see you
were in the car. Else we should not have behaved so absurdly
just now."
The girl looked at me. "But why not?" she replied calmly,
in a surprisingly deep voice. "There was nothing at all bad
about it."
"Bad, no; but not quite fair. That car can do around two
hundred kilometres."
She leaned forward a little and put her hands into the
pockets of her coat. "Two hundred kilometres?" she asked.
"One hundred and eighty-nine point two, to be exact, official register," answered Lenz like a pistol shot proudly.
She laughed. "And we thought about sixty or seventy."
"Well, you see," said I, "you couldn't know, could you?"
"No," she replied, "we certainly couldn't. We thought the
Buick was twice as fast as your car."
"That may be." I kicked aside a broken twig with my foot.
"But we had too big an advantage. I dare say Herr Binding
over there is pretty annoyed with us." She laughed again. "Oh
yes, for a moment certainly. But one has to be able to lose
once in a while."
"True."
There followed a pause. I glanced across at Lenz. But the
last of the romantics merely grinned, twitched his nose, and
left me to wallow.
The birch trees rustled. A cock crowed at the back of the
house.
"Marvellous weather," said I at last to break the silence.
"Yes, splendid," replied the girl.
"And so mild," Lenz added.
"Quite unusually mild," I supplemented.
There followed a fresh pause. The girl must take us for a
nice pair of muttons; but with the best will in the world nothing more occurred to me to say. Lenz was sniffing the air.
"Apple sauce," said he feelingly. "There's going to be
apple sauce with the liver, apparently. A tasty dish."
"Doubtless," I agreed and cursed us both.
Köster and Binding came back. In the few minutes Binding had become a different man. He was beaming, apparently
in a seventh heaven to have found in Köster an expert. He
asked if we would dine with them.
"Of course," replied Lenz.
We went in. As we entered the door Lenz winked at me
and nodded in the direction of the girl. "She cancels out ten of
your dancing old witches, of this morning."
I gave a shrug. "Maybe—but in that case why did you
leave me stuttering there like a fool?"
He laughed. "You must learn to swim for yourself sometime, baby."
"I've no wish to learn anything any more," said I. We followed the others. They were already seated at the table. The
hostess arrived immediately with the liver and chipped potatoes. She brought as well a large bottle of rye whisky as an
introduction.
Binding proved to be a perfect torrent of a talker. It was
amazing all the things he found to say about motor cars.
When he learned that Otto had actually done racing, his good
will knew no restraint any more.
I looked at him more closely. He was a big, heavy fellow
with bushy eyebrows above a ruddy face; a bit given to boasting, a bit noisy, and apparently good-humoured, like folk who
have been successful in life. I could picture him before going
to bed at night, solemnly, appreciatively, approvingly contemplating himself in the mirror.
The girl was seated between Lenz and me. She had taken
off her coat and beneath it wore a grey English costume.
About her neck was tied a white scarf that looked like a stock.
Her hair was brown and silky and in the lamplight had an amber sheen. Her shoulders were very straight but inclined a
little forward, her hands were slender, a bit long, and bony
rather than soft. Her face was narrow and pale, but the large
eyes gave it an almost passionate strength. She looked very
good, I decided—but I thought no more about it.
Lenz on the other hand was all fire and flame. He was
completely changed from what he had been just now. His yellow head of hair shone like the hood of a hoopoe. He let off a
whole firework of wise cracks and in company with Binding
ruled the table. I just had to sit by and could do little to make
myself noticed even—at most, pass a plate once or offer cigarettes. And touch glasses with Binding. I did that fairly often.
Lenz suddenly clapped his hand to his forehead: "The
rum! Bob, go and fetch our birthday rum."
"Birthday? Is it someone's birthday?" asked the girl.
"Yes, mine," said I. "I've been plagued with it all day."
"Plagued? Then you won't be wanting my congratulations, I suppose?"
"Oh, yes," said I; "congratulations is another matter."
"Fine; then all the best."
For a moment I held her hand in mine and felt her warm,
dry pressure. Then I went out to get the rum. The night stood
big and silent about the little house. The leather seats of our
car were moist. I stood and looked toward the horizon where
the red glow of the city rose against the sky. I would gladly
have stayed out there; but already I could hear Lenz calling.
Binding could not carry the rum. After the second glass
one could see that. As he went out into the garden he rocked. I
stood up and walked with Lenz into the bar. He asked for a
bottle of gin.
"Wonderful girl, eh?" said he.
"Don't ask me, Gottfried," I replied. "Haven't paid that
much attention."
He gazed at me a while with his iris-blue eyes and then
shook his gleaming head. "What do you live for then, baby,
tell me?"
"I've been asking myself that a long time," I answered.
He laughed. "You'd like me to tell you, I suppose. Well I
won't right off, just like that. But I think I'll go and see if I
can't dig out how the girl stands with Fatty, the auto
catalogue."
He followed Binding out into the garden. After a while
they both came back to the bar. The information must have
been good, for Gottfried, who now apparently saw the road
clear, from sheer pleasure joined up enthusiastically with
Binding. The two got a fresh bottle of gin and an hour later
were patting each other on the back like old friends. There
was always something charming about Lenz, so that it was
difficult to resist him when he was in good humour. Indeed at
such times he could hardly resist himself. Now he simply
overflowed Binding, and soon the two of them were out in the
arbour singing soldiers' songs. And in the meantime the girl
had entirely forgotten the last of the romantics.
We three were now left alone in the inn parlour. It was
suddenly very quiet. The cuckoo clock ticked. The hostess
cleared away and looked down on us maternally. A brown retriever lay stretched, out in front of the stove. Now and then
he would bark in his sleep, softly, high and plaintive. Outside
the wind sighed past the window. Snatches of soldiers' songs
drifted in; the little room seemed to lift us and float with us
through the night and through the years, past many memories
and half-forgotten things.
It was a strange feeling. Time seemed to have ceased to
flow—it was no longer a river that came from the darkness
and passed out into darkness again—it was a lake in which life
was noiselessly mirrored. I held up my glass in my hand. The
rum glowed. I thought of the account I had drawn up that
morning in the workshop. I had been depressed then; I was so
no longer. I looked at Köster. I heard him talking with the girl;
but I did not attend to their words. I felt the first soft glow of
intoxication that makes the blood warmer and spreads an illusion of adventure over uncertainty. Outside Lenz and Binding
were singing the song of the Argonnerwald. Beside me the unknown girl was talking—she spoke softly and slowly in that
deep, exciting, slightly hoarse voice. I emptied my glass.
The other two came in again. They had sobered a little in
the open air. The party broke up. I helped the girl into her
coat. She was standing immediately in front of me, lithely
moving her shoulders to receive the cloak, her head thrown
back and turned aside, her lips slightly open with a smile that
was meant for no one directed to the ceiling. I lowered the
cloak an instant. Where had my eyes been all this time? I suddenly understood Lenz's enthusiasm.
She turned half toward me inquiringly. Quickly I raised
the cloak again and glanced across at Binding who was standing by the table, cherry-red and still with a rather glazed look
in his eye.
"Do you think he is fit to drive?" I asked.
"I think so."
I looked at her steadily. "If he is not quite safe, one of us
could go with you."
She took out her powder compact and opened it. "It will
be all right," said she. "He drives much better when he has
had something to drink."
"Better, but not so carefully perhaps," I replied.
She looked at me over the top of her little mirror.
"Let's hope it will be all right," I said. I was overdoing it a
bit, for Binding was standing quite tolerably on his pins. But I
wanted to do something so that she would not just vanish
entirely.
"Can I ring you in the morning perhaps, and hear how it
went?" I asked.
She did not reply at once.
"I feel we are partly to blame with all our drinking," I persisted. "Me particularly, with my birthday rum."
She laughed. "All right, if you like. Western 2796."
I made a note of the number immediately we were outside. We watched Binding drive off and had a last glass. Then
we let Karl off the leash. He swept along through the light
March mist, the wind was strong and our breathing quick; the
city came toward us, looming fiery in the darkness, and at last
there rose out of the gloom, like a brilliantly lighted gay liner,
"The Bar." We brought Karl alongside and dropped anchor.
Golden flowed the cognac, the gin gleamed like aquamarine
and the rum was life itself. Upright we sat on the high bar
stools; the music chattered, the pulse of life was clear and
strong; it beat bravely in our hearts; the cheerlessness of the
beastly furnished rooms that awaited us, the hopelessness of
existence, was forgotten; the counter of "The Bar" was the
Captain's bridge of the Ship of Life, and we were set once
more for the open sea.