Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called True
Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest. It was a picture of a boa constrictor
in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is a copy of the drawing.
In the book it said: "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing
it. After that they are not able to move, and they sleep through the six months that
they need for digestion."
I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle. And after some work
with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing. My Drawing
Number One. It looked like this:
I showed my masterpiece to the grown−ups, and asked them whether the drawing
frightened them.
But they answered: "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat?"
My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a picture of a boa constrictor
digesting an elephant. But since the grown−ups were not able to understand it, I
made another drawing: I drew the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the
grown−ups could see it clearly. They always need to have things explained. My
Drawing Number Two looked like this:
The grown−ups' response, this time, was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of
boa constrictors, whether from the inside or the outside, and devote myself instead
to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar. That is why, at the age of six, I
gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter. I had been
disheartened by the failure of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number
Two. Grown−ups never understand anything by themselves, and it is tiresome for
children to be always and forever explaining things to them.
So then I chose another profession, and learned to pilot airplanes. I have flown a
little over all parts of the world; and it is true that geography has been very useful
to me. At a glance I can distinguish China from Arizona. If one gets lost in the
night, such knowledge is valuable.
In the course of this life I have had a great many encounters with a great many
people who have been concerned with matters of consequence. I have lived a great
deal among grown−ups. I have seen them intimately, close at hand. And that
hasn't much improved my opinion of them.
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear−sighted, I tried the
experiment of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept.
I would try to find out, so, if this was a person of true understanding. But,
whoever it was, he, or she, would always say:
"That is a hat." Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or
primeval forests, or stars. I would bring myself down to his level. I would talk to
him about bridge, and golf, and politics, and neckties. And the grown−up would
be greatly pleased to have met such a sensible man. 
So I lived my life alone, without anyone that I could really talk to, until I had an
accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago. Something was
broken in my engine. And as I had with me neither a mechanic nor any
passengers, I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone. It was a question
of life or death for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week.
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand, a thousand miles from any
human habitation. I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the
middle of the ocean. Thus you can imagine my amazement, at sunrise, when I was
awakened by an odd little voice. It said:
"If you please−− draw me a sheep!"
"What!"
"Draw me a sheep!"
I jumped to my feet, completely thunderstruck. I blinked my eyes hard. I looked
carefully all around me. And I saw a most extraordinary small person, who stood
there examining me with great seriousness. Here you may see the best potrait that,
later, I was able to make of him. But my drawing is certainly very much less
charming than its model.
That, however, is not my fault. The grown−ups discouraged me in my painter's
career when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything, except boas
from the outside and boas from the inside.
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my eyes fairly starting out of my head
in astonishment. Remember, I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any
inhabited region. And yet my little man seemed neither to be straying uncertainly
among the sands, nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear.
Nothing about him gave any suggestion of a child lost in the middle of the desert,
a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last I was able to speak, I
said to him:
"But−− what are you doing here?"
And in answer he repeated, very slowly, as if he were speaking of a matter of great
consequence: "If you please−− draw me a sheep..."
When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not disobey. Absurd as it might
seem to me, a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death, I
took out of my pocket a sheet of paper and my fountain−pen. But then I
remembered how my studies had been concentrated on geography, history,
arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (a little crossly, too) that I did
not know how to draw. He answered me:
"That doesn't matter. Draw me a sheep..."
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures I had
drawn so often. It was that of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was
astounded to hear the little fellow greet it with,
"No, no, no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor
is a very dangerous creature, and an elephant is very cumbersome. Where I live,
everything is very small. What I need is a sheep. Draw me a sheep."
So then I made a drawing.
He looked at it carefully, then he said:
"No. This sheep is already very sickly. Make me another."
So I made another drawing.
My friend smiled gently and indulgenty.
"You see yourself," he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram. It has horns."
So then I did my drawing over once more. 
But it was rejected too, just like the others.
"This one is too old. I want a sheep that will live a long time."
By this time my patience was exhausted, because I was in a hurry to start taking
my engine apart. So I tossed off this drawing.
And I threw out an explanation with it.
"This is only his box. The sheep you asked for is inside."
I was very surprised to see a light break over the face of my young judge:
"That is exactly the way I wanted it! Do you think that this sheep will have to have
a great deal of grass?"
"Why?"
"Because where I live everything is very small..."
"There will surely be enough grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep that I
have given you."
He bent his head over the drawing:
"Not so small that−− Look! He has gone to sleep..." And that is how I made the
acquaintance of the little prince. 
It took me a long time to learn where he came from. The little prince, who asked
me so many questions, never seemed to hear the ones I asked him. It was from
words dropped by chance that, little by little, everything was revealed to me.
The first time he saw my airplane, for instance (I shall not draw my airplane; that
would be much too complicated for me), he asked me:
"What is that object?"
"That is not an object. It flies. It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly.
He cried out, then:
"What! You dropped down from the sky?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly.
"Oh! That is funny!"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter, which irritated me very
much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously.
Then he added:
"So you, too, come from the sky! Which is your planet?"
At that moment I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his
presence; and I demanded, abruptly:
"Do you come from another planet?"
But he did not reply. He tossed his head gently, without taking his eyes from my
plane:
"It is true that on that you can't have come from very far away..."
And he sank into a reverie, which lasted a long time. Then, taking my sheep out of
his pocket, he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure.
You can imagine how my curiosity was aroused by this half−confidence about the
"other planets." I made a great effort, therefore, to find out more on this subject.
"My little man, where do you come from? What is this 'where I live,' of which you
speak? Where do you want to take your sheep?"
After a reflective silence he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me is that at night he can
use it as his house."
"That is so. And if you are good I will give you a string, too, so that you can tie
him during the day, and a post to tie him to." 
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer:
"Tie him! What a queer idea!"
"But if you don't tie him," I said, "he will wander off somewhere, and get lost."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter:
"But where do you think he would go?"
"Anywhere. Straight ahead of him."
Then the little prince said, earnestly:
"That doesn't matter. Where I live, everything is so small!"
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness, he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far..."
I had thus learned a second fact of great importance: this was that the planet the
little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house!
But that did not really surprise me much. I knew very well that in addition to the
great planets−− such as the Earth, Jupiter, Mars, Venus−− to which we have given
names, there are also hundreds of others, some of which are so small that one has
a hard time seeing them through the telescope. When an astronomer discovers one
of these he does not give it a name, but only a number. He might call it, for
example, "Asteroid 325." 
I have serious reason to believe that the planet from which the little prince came is
the asteroid known as B−612.
This asteroid has only once been seen through the telescope. That was by a
Turkish astronomer, in 1909.
On making his discovery, the astronomer had presented it to the International
Astronomical Congress, in a great demonstration. But he was in Turkish costume,
and so nobody would believe what he said.
Grown−ups are like that...
Fortunately, however, for the reputation of Asteroid B−612, a Turkish dictator
made a law that his subjects, under pain of death, should change to European
costume. So in 1920 the astronomer gave his demonstration all over again, dressed
with impressive style and elegance. And this time everybody accepted his report.
If I have told you these details about the asteroid, and made a note of its number
for you, it is on account of the grown−ups and their ways. When you tell them that
you have made a new friend, they never ask you any questions about essential
matters. They never say to you, "What does his voice sound like? What games
does he love best? Does he collect butterflies?" Instead, they demand: "How old is
he? How many brothers has he? How much does he weigh? How much money
does his father make?" Only from these figures do they think they have learned
anything about him.
If you were to say to the grown−ups: "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick,
with geraniums in the windows and doves on the roof," they would not be able to
get any idea of that house at all. You would have to say to them: "I saw a house
that cost $20,000." Then they would exclaim: "Oh, what a pretty house that is!"
Just so, you might say to them: "The proof that the little prince existed is that he
was charming, that he laughed, and that he was looking for a sheep. If anybody
wants a sheep, that is a proof that he exists." And what good would it do to tell
them that? They would shrug their shoulders, and treat you like a child. But if you
said to them: "The planet he came from is Asteroid B−612," then they would be
convinced, and leave you in peace from their questions.
They are like that. One must not hold it against them. Children should always
show great forbearance toward grown−up people.
But certainly, for us who understand life, figures are a matter of indifference. I
should have liked to begin this story in the fashion of the fairy−tales. I should
have like to say: "Once upon a time there was a little prince who lived on a planet
that was scarcely any bigger than himself, and who had need of a sheep..."
To those who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth to
my story.
For I do not want any one to read my book carelessly. I have suffered too much
grief in setting down these memories. Six years have already passed since my
friend went away from me, with his sheep. If I try to describe him here, it is to
make sure that I shall not forget him. To forget a friend is sad. Not every one has
had a friend. And if I forget him, I may become like the grown−ups who are no
longer interested in anything but figures...
It is for that purpose, again, that I have bought a box of paints and some pencils. It
is hard to take up drawing again at my age, when I have never made any pictures
except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from
the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try to make my portraits as true to life
as possible. But I am not at all sure of success. One drawing goes along all right,
and another has no resemblance to its subject. I make some errors, too, in the littl e
prince's height: in one place he is too tall and in another too short. And I feel some
doubts about the color of his costume. So I fumble along as best I can, now good,
now bad, and I hope generally fair−to−middling.
In certain more important details I shall make mistakes, also. But that is something
that will not be my fault. My friend never explained anything to me. He thought,
perhaps, that I was like himself. But I, alas, do not know how to see sheep through
t he walls of boxes. Perhaps I am a little like the grown−ups. I have had to grow
old.